
Project @PROJECTNAME@
----------------------

Welcome.

Getting Started
---------------

  create a database 
  edit resources/hibernate.properties accordingly

  create a model class, conforming to the conventions
   described in the file named "Cliche" in this directory.

  add type to src/persistClasses.xml
       and to src/com/u2d/class-list.xml

  then:
   ant genhbm
      ..will automatically create hibernate hbm.xml mapping files for your model classes
      you can navigate through the package hierarchy under build/classes and locate the
       generated hbm.xml files for your model classes.
   ant schema-export
      ..will automatically create and export the ddl to your database
      you should be able to connect to your database and see the generated tables at
      this point.

   place image files for your new type in resources/images
    (see the README file in that directory)

   then:
    ant run

   will automatically launch your application.  by default, a single user will
   already exist in the system:  username: admin with password: admin
   passwords are hashed and then stored in the database.  Feel free to create
   new users via the gui.  As soon as a new user is created, that new user
   can log in to the system.

   if you wish to customize a splash screen for your application, simply
   put a "splash.gif" (or png or jpg) in resources/images.

   out of the box you get a lot:

   a. persistence
   b. a rich gui
   c. authentication
   d. ability to manage users and roles directly from the gui
   e. complete search/query support for your types directly 
        from the gui
   f. ability to define and save your query specifications for
        later execution
   g. desktop configuration is saved per user when they log out
      or quit, regardless of where they log in from.
   h. support for building wizards into the application
   i. support for producing pdf's via jfreereport and iText
   j. authorization system not yet completely working
   k. meta-information visible from ui (not yet editable)
   l. support for n-parameter captions
   m. built-in paging support for large lists
   n. export to csv feature for lists
   o. multiple views for lists (table, icons, list, composite views, ..)
   p. copy/paste feature


Sincerely,
/ Eitan Suez
2005

